=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

Sidef::Types::Number::Complex - Complex number support for Sidef

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This class implements support for complex numbers in Sidef. It inherits from C<Sidef::Types::Number::Number>.

Complex numbers are typically created using the imaginary unit C<i>, or by explicitly calling the constructor.

=head1 SYNOPSIS

    var z = 3+4i
    say z.class         # Number

    var a = 1+2i
    var b = 1-2i

    say (a + b)         # 2
    say (a - b)         # 4i
    say (a * b)         # 5
    say (a / b)         # -0.6 + 0.8i

    say z.real          # 3
    say z.imag          # 4
    say z.abs           # 5

=head1 INHERITANCE

  Sidef::Types::Number::Complex
  isa Sidef::Types::Number::Number
  isa Sidef::Object::Object

=head1 METHODS

=head2 new

    Complex(real, imag)

Creates a new Complex object with the given real part C<real> and imaginary part C<imag>.

=head2 real

    z.real
    z.re

Returns the real part of the complex number.

=head2 imag

    z.imag
    z.im

Returns the imaginary part of the complex number.

=head2 parts

    z.parts

Returns a list containing the real part and the imaginary part.

    var z = 3+4i
    var (r, i) = z.parts    # (3, 4)

=head2 abs

    z.abs
    z.mag

Returns the absolute value (magnitude) of the complex number ($|z| = \sqrt{a^2 + b^2}$).

=head2 arg

    z.arg
    z.angle
    z.phase

Returns the argument (phase angle) of the complex number in radians.

=head2 conj

    z.conj

Returns the complex conjugate of the number ($\bar{z} = a - bi$).

=head2 inv

    z.inv

Returns the multiplicative inverse (reciprocal) of the complex number ($1/z$).

=head2 neg

    z.neg
    -z

Returns the negation of the complex number.

=head2 sign

    z.sign

Returns the complex sign (signum) of the number ($z / |z|$), or 0 if $z$ is 0.

=head2 sqr

    z.sqr

Returns the square of the complex number ($z^2$).

=head2 sqrt

    z.sqrt

Returns the principal square root of the complex number.

=head2 exp

    z.exp

Returns the exponential of the complex number ($e^z$).

=head2 log

    z.log

Returns the natural logarithm of the complex number.

=head2 sin

    z.sin

Returns the sine of the complex number.

=head2 cos

    z.cos

Returns the cosine of the complex number.

=head2 tan

    z.tan

Returns the tangent of the complex number.

=head2 asin

    z.asin

Returns the arc sine of the complex number.

=head2 acos

    z.acos

Returns the arc cosine of the complex number.

=head2 atan

    z.atan

Returns the arc tangent of the complex number.

=head2 sinh

    z.sinh

Returns the hyperbolic sine of the complex number.

=head2 cosh

    z.cosh

Returns the hyperbolic cosine of the complex number.

=head2 tanh

    z.tanh

Returns the hyperbolic tangent of the complex number.

=head2 asinh

    z.asinh

Returns the inverse hyperbolic sine of the complex number.

=head2 acosh

    z.acosh

Returns the inverse hyperbolic cosine of the complex number.

=head2 atanh

    z.atanh

Returns the inverse hyperbolic tangent of the complex number.

=head2 is_real

    z.is_real

Returns true if the imaginary part is zero.

=head2 is_imag

    z.is_imag

Returns true if the real part is zero.

=head2 is_zero

    z.is_zero

Returns true if the complex number is equal to zero.

=head2 is_one

    z.is_one

Returns true if the complex number is equal to one.

=head2 to_s

    z.to_s

Returns the string representation of the complex number (e.g., "3+4i").

=head2 dump

    z.dump

Returns a string representation of the object for debugging purposes.

=head1 OPERATORS

The following operators are overloaded for C<Sidef::Types::Number::Complex>:

=over 4

=item *

C<+> (Addition)

=item *

C<-> (Subtraction)

=item *

C<*> (Multiplication)

=item *

C</> (Division)

=item *

C<**> (Exponentiation)

=item *

C<< <=> >> (Comparison)

=back

=head1 AUTHOR

Daniel "Trizen" Șuteu, E<lt>trizen@cpan.orgE<gt>

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

Copyright (C) 2013-2025 by Daniel "Trizen" Șuteu

This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the same terms as Perl itself, either Perl version 5.26.1 or,
at your option, any later version of Perl 5 you may have available.

=cut
