=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

Sidef::Types::Number::PolynomialMod - Polynomial arithmetic in quotient rings

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This class implements polynomial arithmetic in quotient rings of the form
R[x]/(m(x)), where polynomials are reduced modulo a fixed modulus polynomial
C<m(x)>. This mirrors how integers modulo n work (via C<Sidef::Types::Number::Mod>),
but in the polynomial domain.

A C<PolynomialMod> object is a pair C<[poly, modulus]> where C<poly> is the
residue polynomial (already reduced) and C<modulus> is the polynomial by which
all results are reduced. All arithmetic operations automatically reduce their
result modulo the shared modulus.

Internally, polynomials are stored as a hash mapping integer exponents to
their coefficients (C<Sidef::Types::Number::Number> objects). Zero coefficients
are not stored.

Typical use cases include:

=over 4

=item * Finite field arithmetic (e.g., GF(2^8) for AES)

=item * Algebraic number fields (e.g., Q[x]/(x^2+1) ≅ Gaussian integers)

=item * Cyclotomic fields and rings of algebraic integers

=item * Factoring polynomials over finite fields

=back

=head1 SYNOPSIS

    # Create polynomials mod (1 + x^2) — working in Q[x]/(x^2 + 1)
    var i = PolynomialMod([0, 1], [1, 0, 1])   # represents the element x (i.e. sqrt(-1))
    say i**2     # Output: -1 (mod x^2 + 1)
    say i**4     # Output: 1 (mod x^2 + 1)

    # General arithmetic
    var p = PolynomialMod([1, 2, 3], [1, 0, 1])   # (3x^2 + 2x + 1) mod (x^2 + 1)
    var q = PolynomialMod([1, 2],   [1, 0, 1])    # (2x + 1) mod (x^2 + 1)
    say (p + q)      # Addition
    say (p - q)      # Subtraction
    say (p * q)      # Multiplication, reduced mod (x^2 + 1)
    say (p ** 3)     # Exponentiation via square-and-multiply

    # Division (exact when the inverse exists)
    say (p / q)

    # Polynomial GCD and extended GCD
    var (g, u, v) = p.gcdext(q)

    # Evaluate the polynomial at a point
    say p.eval(2)

    # Retrieve parts
    say p.modulus      # The modulus polynomial: x^2 + 1
    say p.lift         # The underlying Polynomial (without modulus)

    # CRT reconstruction
    var r = PolynomialMod.chinese(p, q)

=head1 COEFFICIENT ORDER IN ARRAY CONSTRUCTORS

When constructing from an array, coefficients are given in B<descending>
degree order (highest-degree coefficient first):

    PolynomialMod([a_n, a_{n-1}, ..., a_1, a_0], modulus)
    # represents a_n*x^n + a_{n-1}*x^{n-1} + ... + a_1*x + a_0

Examples:

    PolynomialMod([1, 0, 1], [1, 0, 0, 1])
    # polynomial:  x^2 + 1
    # modulus:     x^3 + 1

    PolynomialMod([0, 1], [1, 0, 1])
    # polynomial:  x
    # modulus:     x^2 + 1

The same descending convention applies when constructing the modulus array.

=head1 INHERITS

Inherits methods from:

    Sidef::Types::Number::Polynomial

Many methods not overridden here (such as C<degree>, C<coeffs>, C<exponents>,
C<content>, C<leading_coefficient>, C<height>, etc.) are provided by the
parent class and operate on the I<lifted> polynomial without the modulus
constraint.

=head1 METHODS

=head2 new

    PolynomialMod(array_ref, modulus_array_ref)
    PolynomialMod(array_ref, modulus_poly)
    PolynomialMod(poly,      modulus)
    self.new(...)

Constructs a new C<PolynomialMod> object. The last argument is always the
modulus; everything before it specifies the polynomial residue.

The modulus may be given as an array reference or as an existing
C<Sidef::Types::Number::Polynomial> object. The residue polynomial is reduced
modulo the modulus upon construction.

    # From coefficient arrays (descending degree order)
    var p = PolynomialMod([3, 2, 1], [1, 0, 1])   # (3x^2 + 2x + 1) mod (x^2 + 1)

    # From an existing Polynomial object
    var m = Polynomial([1, 0, 1])
    var p = PolynomialMod([3, 2, 1], m)

    # Instance-method form (creates new object with same class)
    var q = p.new([1, 2], [1, 0, 1])

B<Special case — instance call with one argument:> when called as an instance
method with a single argument (no coefficients before the modulus), it
evaluates the polynomial at that argument rather than constructing a new
object. See L</eval>.

Aliases: I<call>

=cut

=head2 lift

    self.lift

Returns the underlying C<Sidef::Types::Number::Polynomial> object, i.e. the
reduced residue polynomial stripped of its modulus. The returned value is a
plain C<Polynomial> in the free ring R[x].

    var p = PolynomialMod([1, 2, 3], [1, 0, 1])
    say p.lift    # Polynomial: 2x + (1 - 3) = -2 + 2x (after reduction)

Aliases: I<to_poly>

=cut

=head2 modulus

    self.modulus

Returns the modulus polynomial by which all arithmetic in this quotient ring
is reduced. The return value is a C<Sidef::Types::Number::Polynomial>.

    var p = PolynomialMod([1, 2], [1, 0, 1])
    say p.modulus   # x^2 + 1

=cut

=head2 +

    a + b

Returns the sum of C<a> and C<b>, reduced modulo the shared modulus. Both
operands must share the same modulus polynomial. If C<b> is a scalar
(non-PolynomialMod), it is added to the constant term after reduction.

Aliases: I<add>

=cut

=head2 ++

    a++

Increments C<a> by 1 (adds the constant polynomial 1) and reduces modulo the
modulus. Equivalent to C<a + 1>.

Aliases: I<inc>

=cut

=head2 -

    a - b

Returns the difference C<a - b>, reduced modulo the shared modulus. If C<b>
is a scalar, it is subtracted from the constant term after reduction.

Aliases: I<sub>

=cut

=head2 --

    a--

Decrements C<a> by 1 (subtracts the constant polynomial 1) and reduces
modulo the modulus.

Aliases: I<dec>

=cut

=head2 *

    a * b

Returns the product of C<a> and C<b>, reduced modulo the shared modulus.
Coefficient multiplication is also reduced modulo the modulus at each step,
keeping intermediate values small.

If C<b> is a scalar, each coefficient of C<a> is multiplied by C<b> (after
reducing C<b> mod the modulus) without a full polynomial multiplication.

Aliases: I<mul>

=cut

=head2 sqr

    x.sqr

Returns the square of C<x> modulo the modulus. Equivalent to C<x * x>.

=cut

=head2 **

    a ** n

Returns C<a> raised to the integer power C<n>, computed modulo the modulus
polynomial using the binary (square-and-multiply) method. C<n> may be:

=over 4

=item * A non-negative integer — standard modular exponentiation.

=item * A negative integer — computes C<(a^|n|)^{-1}> via L</inv>.

=back

    var i = PolynomialMod([0, 1], [1, 0, 1])   # x mod (x^2 + 1)
    say i ** 2    # -1 mod (x^2 + 1)
    say i ** 4    # 1  mod (x^2 + 1)

Aliases: I<pow>

=cut

=head2 /

    a / b

Divides C<a> by C<b> in the quotient ring.

=over 4

=item * If C<b> is a C<PolynomialMod> with the same modulus, polynomial
Euclidean division is attempted. If the division is exact, the quotient is
returned. If not exact, a C<Sidef::Types::Number::Fraction> object is
returned.

=item * If C<b> is zero, returns a polynomial with an infinite coefficient.

=item * If C<b> is a scalar, each coefficient of C<a> is divided by C<b>
(after reducing C<b> mod the modulus).

=back

Note that exact division in a polynomial quotient ring requires the leading
coefficient of C<b> to be invertible modulo the coefficient ring (e.g., the
modulus is prime for GF(p)[x] arithmetic). If the inverse does not exist
(e.g. working over a non-field), the result is NaN.

Aliases: I<div>, I<÷>

=cut

=head2 //

    a // b

Returns the integer quotient from Euclidean division of C<a> by C<b>,
discarding the remainder. Equivalent to the quotient component of L</divmod>.

Note: The rounding variants (C<idiv_ceil>, C<idiv_floor>, C<idiv_round>,
C<idiv_trunc>) are all currently aliased to the same integer-quotient
behaviour.

Aliases: I<idiv>, I<idiv_ceil>, I<idiv_floor>, I<idiv_round>, I<idiv_trunc>

=cut

=head2 %

    a % b

When C<b> is a C<PolynomialMod> with the B<same> modulus as C<a>, returns the
remainder from Euclidean polynomial division (i.e. the second component of
L</divmod>).

When C<b> is a different polynomial (or has a different modulus), B<reinterprets>
C<b> as the new modulus and returns a new C<PolynomialMod> object with the same
residue polynomial but reduced under the new modulus. This is the primary way
to change the modulus of an existing polynomial.

    var p = PolynomialMod([1, 2, 3], [1, 0, 1])
    var q = PolynomialMod([1, 1],   [1, 0, 1])
    say p % q      # remainder of p divided by q, mod (x^2 + 1)

Aliases: I<mod>

=cut

=head2 divmod

    x.divmod(y)

Performs Euclidean polynomial division of C<x> by C<y> within the quotient
ring, using the standard long-division algorithm. The leading coefficient of
C<y> must be invertible in the coefficient ring (its modular inverse is
computed and used at each step).

Returns a list of two C<PolynomialMod> objects C<(quotient, remainder)>
satisfying C<x == quotient * y + remainder> with C<deg(remainder) < deg(y)>.

If C<x> and C<y> have different moduli, both quotient and remainder are NaN.
If the leading coefficient of C<y> has no modular inverse, returns NaN.

=cut

=head2 neg

    x.neg

Returns the additive inverse of C<x>: the polynomial whose coefficients are
all negated. Adding C<x> and C<x.neg> yields the zero polynomial.

=cut

=head2 abs

    x.abs

Returns C<x> multiplied by the sign of its leading coefficient, ensuring the
leading coefficient is positive. Equivalent to C<x * x.sgn>.

=cut

=head2 inv

    x.inv

Compute the multiplicative inverse of a PolynomialMod element.

In the quotient ring C<R[x]/(m(x))>, the inverse of C<f(x)> exists if and only
if C<gcd(f, m) = 1>. When it exists, the extended Euclidean algorithm gives
polynomials C<u> and C<v> such that:

  u(x)*f(x) + v(x)*m(x) = 1

which means C<u(x)*f(x) ≡ 1 (mod m(x))>, so C<u> is the inverse.

We use C<Polynomial::gcdext> on the I<lifted> polynomials (plain polynomial
ring arithmetic), which normalizes the GCD to monic. If the result is
the constant polynomial C<1>, the Bézout coefficient C<u> is the inverse.
The C<PolynomialMod> constructor automatically reduces C<u> modulo C<m>.

=head3 Reference

L<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polynomial_greatest_common_divisor#B%C3%A9zout's_identity_and_extended_GCD_algorithm>

=head3 Example

  # Matches PARI/GP: Mod(1+2*x, x^3+1)^(-1)
  var p = PolynomialMod([2, 1], [1, 0, 0, 1])   # (2x+1) mod (x^3+1)
  say(p.inv)    # -4/7*x^2 + 2/7*x - 1/7  (mod x^3+1)
  say((p * p.inv) == 1)   # true

=cut

=head2 gcd

    x.gcd(y)

Returns the greatest common divisor of polynomials C<x> and C<y> in the
quotient ring, using the polynomial Euclidean algorithm (repeated
remainder computation):

    r0 = x, r1 = y
    loop: (r0, r1) = (r1, r0 mod r1) until r1 is zero
    return r0

Both C<x> and C<y> must share the same modulus. The result is the GCD as a
C<PolynomialMod> in the same ring.

Reference: L<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polynomial_greatest_common_divisor#Euclid's_algorithm>

=cut

=head2 gcdext

    x.gcdext(y)

Extended Euclidean algorithm for polynomials in the quotient ring. Returns a
list of B<five> values:

    (g, u, v, a1, b1)

where C<g = gcd(x, y)> and C<u>, C<v> are Bézout coefficients satisfying:

    u*x + v*y == g

The additional values C<a1> and C<b1> (the final remainders scaled by a sign
factor) are also returned; they relate to the last non-trivial step of the

extended Euclidean recursion.

Example:

    var (g, u, v) = p.gcdext(q)
    say u*p + v*q == g    # True

Reference: L<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polynomial_greatest_common_divisor#B%C3%A9zout's_identity_and_extended_GCD_algorithm>

=cut

=head2 lcm

    x.lcm(y)

Returns the least common multiple of polynomials C<x> and C<y>, computed as:

    lcm(x, y) = abs(x * y) / gcd(x, y)

=cut

=head2 normalize_to_monic

    x.normalize_to_monic

Returns a monic version of C<x> (leading coefficient equal to 1) by
multiplying each coefficient by the modular inverse of the leading coefficient.
If the leading coefficient is already 1, C<x> is returned unchanged. If the
inverse does not exist (e.g. the coefficient ring is not a field), returns
C<x> unchanged.

=cut

=head2 derivative

    x.derivative

Returns the formal derivative of C<x> with respect to the polynomial variable,
reduced modulo the modulus. Each term C<c_k * t^k> maps to C<k * c_k * t^{k-1}>,
with the coefficient also reduced modulo the modulus polynomial.

    var p = PolynomialMod([1, 3, 1], [1, 0, 1])   # x^2 + 3x + 1 mod (x^2+1)
    say p.derivative   # 3 + 2x, reduced mod (x^2 + 1)

=cut

=head2 eval

    x.eval(value)

Evaluates the polynomial at C<value> by Horner-style substitution, using
modular arithmetic throughout. The value is first reduced modulo the modulus
polynomial, and powers of the value are computed as C<Sidef::Types::Number::Mod>
elements to keep results in the quotient ring.

Returns a scalar (C<Sidef::Types::Number::Number>).

    var p = PolynomialMod([1, 2, 3], [1, 0, 1])
    say p.eval(2)     # evaluates (3*4 + 2*2 + 1) mod ... = 17 mod (x^2+1)

If the polynomial is the zero polynomial, returns 0 directly.

=cut

=head2 binomial

    n.binomial(k)

Computes the generalised binomial coefficient C(n, k) where C<n> is a
C<PolynomialMod> and C<k> is an integer. Uses the falling-factorial definition:

    C(n, k) = n * (n-1) * ... * (n-k+1) / k!

The product is computed via binary splitting for efficiency, and the division
by C<k!> is performed via L</div>.

    var x = PolynomialMod([1, 0], [1, 0, 1])   # x mod (x^2+1)
    say x.binomial(2)   # x*(x-1)/2 mod (x^2+1)

=cut

=head2 chinese

    *polynomials.chinese

Applies the Chinese Remainder Theorem (CRT) to a list of C<PolynomialMod>
objects that may have different moduli. Finds a single polynomial congruent to
each input modulo its respective modulus. The combined modulus is the LCM of
all individual moduli.

    var a = PolynomialMod([1, 2], [1, 0, 1])   # 2x+1 mod (x^2+1)
    var b = PolynomialMod([3, 1], [1, 1, 1])   # x+3 mod (x^2+x+1)
    var c = PolynomialMod.chinese(a, b)

=cut

=head2 ==

    a == b

Returns true if C<a> and C<b> are equal as elements of the same quotient ring.
Two C<PolynomialMod> objects are equal if and only if their moduli are equal
and their residue polynomials are equal (coefficient by coefficient). When
comparing against a non-C<PolynomialMod> value, the value is reduced modulo
C<a>'s modulus before comparison.

Aliases: I<eq>

=cut

=head2 !=

    a != b

Returns true if C<a> is not equal to C<b>. Implemented as the logical negation
of L</==>. See L</==> for the equality semantics.

Aliases: I<ne>

=cut

=head2 <=>

    a <=> b

Three-way comparison. When both arguments are C<PolynomialMod> objects, the
moduli are compared first; if they differ, that result is returned. Otherwise
the residue polynomials are compared lexicographically (highest-degree
coefficient first, then lower degrees). Returns -1, 0, or 1.

Aliases: I<cmp>

=cut

=head2 <

    a < b

Returns true if C<a> is strictly less than C<b> under the lexicographic
ordering defined by L</<=>>. 

Aliases: I<lt>

=cut

=head2 >

    a > b

Returns true if C<a> is strictly greater than C<b>.

Aliases: I<gt>

=cut

=head2 ≤

    a ≤ b

Returns true if C<a> is less than or equal to C<b>.

Aliases: I<E<lt>=>, I<le>

=cut

=head2 ≥

    a ≥ b

Returns true if C<a> is greater than or equal to C<b>.

Aliases: I<E<gt>=>, I<ge>

=cut

=head2 is_zero

    x.is_zero

Returns true if C<x> is the zero polynomial (the additive identity). Uses
L</==> against 0.

=cut

=head2 is_one

    x.is_one

Returns true if C<x> is the polynomial 1 (the multiplicative identity). Uses
L</==> against 1.

=cut

=head2 is_mone

    x.is_mone

Returns true if C<x> equals the constant polynomial -1. Uses L</==> against -1.

=cut

=head2 float

    x.float

Returns a new C<PolynomialMod> with each coefficient converted to a
floating-point approximation, preserving the modulus.

=cut

=head2 rat

    x.rat

Returns a new C<PolynomialMod> with each coefficient converted to an exact
rational number (C<Math::GMPq>), preserving the modulus.

=cut

=head2 rat_approx

    x.rat_approx

Returns a new C<PolynomialMod> with each floating-point coefficient replaced
by a nearby rational approximation, preserving the modulus.

=cut

=head2 floor

    x.floor

Returns a new C<PolynomialMod> with C<floor()> applied to each coefficient,
preserving the modulus.

=cut

=head2 ceil

    x.ceil

Returns a new C<PolynomialMod> with C<ceil()> applied to each coefficient,
preserving the modulus.

=cut

=head2 round

    x.round(r)

Returns a new C<PolynomialMod> with each coefficient rounded to C<r> decimal
places (or to the nearest integer when C<r> is zero/unspecified), preserving
the modulus.

=cut

=head2 to_s

    x.to_s

Returns a C<Sidef::Types::String::String> representation of the polynomial in
the form:

    <polynomial expression> (mod <modulus expression>)

For example: C<2*x + 1 (mod x^2 + 1)>.

Aliases: I<stringify>

=cut

=head2 pretty

    x.pretty

Like L</to_s> but uses the C<pretty> display method from the parent class,
which renders Unicode superscripts and cleaner coefficient notation.

=cut

=head2 dump

    x.dump

Returns a C<Sidef::Types::String::String> containing a round-trippable
representation of the C<PolynomialMod> object:

    PolynomialMod(<exponent> => <coeff>, ..., <modulus>)

This mirrors the internal sparse storage format and is suitable for debugging.

=cut

=head1 BOOLEAN CONTEXT

In boolean context (C<if>, C<while>, etc.), a C<PolynomialMod> is truthy if
its constant term (coefficient of x^0) is truthy, and falsy if zero or absent.

=head1 EXAMPLES

=head2 Gaussian integers via Q[x]/(x² + 1)

    var i = PolynomialMod([0, 1], [1, 0, 1])   # x ≡ i
    say i ** 2    # -1 (mod x^2 + 1)
    say i ** 4    # 1  (mod x^2 + 1)

    var a = PolynomialMod([3, 2], [1, 0, 1])   # 2x + 3 ≡ 3 + 2i
    var b = PolynomialMod([1, 4], [1, 0, 1])   # 4x + 1 ≡ 1 + 4i
    say a * b   # (3+2i)(1+4i) = 3+12i+2i+8i^2 = (3-8) + 14i = -5 + 14i
                # Output: 14*x - 5 (mod x^2 + 1)

=head2 GCD and Bézout coefficients

    var p = PolynomialMod([1, 0, 1], [1, 0, 0, 1])  # x^2+1 mod x^3+1
    var q = PolynomialMod([1, 1],   [1, 0, 0, 1])   # x+1   mod x^3+1
    var (g, u, v) = p.gcdext(q)
    say g             # gcd
    say u*p + v*q     # should equal g

=head2 Finite field GF(2)[x]/(x^4 + x + 1) — an irreducible polynomial over GF(2)

    var m = [1, 0, 0, 1, 1]    # x^4 + x + 1
    var a = PolynomialMod([1, 1, 0, 1], m)  # x^3 + x + 1
    var b = PolynomialMod([1, 0, 1, 1], m)  # x^3 + x^2 + 1
    say a * b    # product in GF(2^4)

=head2 Chinese Remainder Theorem

    var a = PolynomialMod([2, 1], [1, 0, 1])   # 2x+1 mod (x^2+1)
    var b = PolynomialMod([1, 3], [1, 1, 1])   # x+3  mod (x^2+x+1)
    var c = PolynomialMod.chinese(a, b)
    say c         # polynomial congruent to both a and b mod their respective moduli

=head2 Derivative in a quotient ring

    var p = PolynomialMod([1, 0, 3, 2], [1, 0, 1])  # 3x^2 + 2x (after reduction)
    say p.derivative   # formal derivative reduced mod (x^2 + 1)

=head1 NOTES

=over 4

=item *

B<Operand compatibility:> Most binary operations (C<+>, C<->, C<*>, C<gcd>,
C<divmod>, etc.) require both operands to share the same modulus polynomial.
Mixing operands with different moduli will either give wrong results or return
NaN.

=item *

B<Coefficient ring:> Coefficients are general C<Sidef::Types::Number::Number>
objects (arbitrary precision). For finite-field semantics (e.g. GF(p)[x]),
you should use a modulus polynomial whose coefficients are already in GF(p) and
ensure your input coefficients are also reduced mod p.

=item *

B<Inherited methods:> Methods not overridden here (C<degree>, C<coeffs>,
C<exponents>, C<leading_coefficient>, C<content>, C<primitive_part>,
C<height>, C<is_squarefree>, C<squarefree_part>, C<roots>, C<powmod>,
C<invmod>, C<newton_method>, etc.) are inherited from
C<Sidef::Types::Number::Polynomial> and operate on the lifted polynomial
without the modulus.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<Sidef::Types::Number::Polynomial>,
L<Sidef::Types::Number::Mod>,
L<Sidef::Types::Number::Fraction>

=cut
