=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

Sidef::Module::Func - Functional interface for Perl modules used from Sidef

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This class provides a functional (non-OO) bridge between Sidef and Perl modules, enabling
Sidef code to call Perl functions exported by a module as if they were methods on an object.
It is the underlying mechanism that powers Sidef's C<frequire()> built-in function and
the C<%S> module literal syntax.

When a Perl module is loaded with C<frequire()>, the resulting object is an instance of
C<Sidef::Module::Func>. Any method call on that object is intercepted by C<AUTOLOAD> and
dispatched as a fully-qualified function call into the module's namespace
(i.e., C<Module::Name::function_name(@args)>), with arguments and return values
transparently converted between Sidef and Perl types.

This is distinct from C<Sidef::Module::OO>, which wraps a Perl object and dispatches
method calls on it. C<Sidef::Module::Func> instead calls free functions (package functions)
in the module's namespace directly, making it suitable for functional-style Perl modules
such as C<POSIX>, C<List::Util>, C<Scalar::Util>, and similar.

=head1 SYNOPSIS

=head2 Loading a Functional Perl Module

    # frequire() returns a Sidef::Module::Func wrapper around the module name
    var posix = frequire('POSIX')

    say posix.floor(3.7)    # => 3
    say posix.ceil(3.2)     # => 4
    say posix.fmod(10, 3)   # => 1

=head2 Shorthand Syntax

    # %S is syntactic sugar for frequire() in the Sidef language
    var posix = %S<POSIX>
    say posix.floor(4.9)    # => 4

=head2 Using List::Util Functions

    var lu = frequire('List::Util')

    var nums = [3, 1, 4, 1, 5, 9, 2, 6]
    say lu.sum(nums...)     # => 31
    say lu.min(nums...)     # => 1
    say lu.max(nums...)     # => 9

=head2 Using Scalar::Util Functions

    var su = frequire('Scalar::Util')

    var val = 42
    say su.looks_like_number(val)   # => 1
    say su.blessed(val)             # => (empty / undef)

=head1 METHODS

=head2 __NEW__

    Sidef::Module::Func->__NEW__($module)

Constructs a new C<Sidef::Module::Func> wrapper around the given Perl module name.
The module must already be loaded (C<require>d) before or during construction.

B<Parameters:>

=over 4

=item * C<$module> - A Perl module name (string), e.g. C<"POSIX"> or C<"List::Util">

=back

B<Returns:> A new C<Sidef::Module::Func> object

B<Note:> This constructor is used internally by the Sidef runtime. In Sidef code, use
C<frequire()> or the C<%S> syntax instead of calling C<__NEW__> directly.

=head2 AUTOLOAD

    $func_obj->some_function(@args)

All method calls on a C<Sidef::Module::Func> object are intercepted by C<AUTOLOAD> and
forwarded as function calls into the wrapped module's namespace. For example, calling
C<$obj-E<gt>floor(3.7)> on a C<Sidef::Module::Func> wrapping C<"POSIX"> results in
C<POSIX::floor(3.7)> being called.

Arguments are automatically converted from Sidef types to plain Perl values before
the call, and return values are automatically converted back to Sidef types using
C<Sidef::Types::Perl::Perl-E<gt>to_sidef>.

B<Argument Conversion:>

=over 4

=item * Sidef objects (C<Sidef::*>) → the underlying Perl value via C<get_value>

=item * Plain Perl values → passed through unchanged

=back

B<Return Value Conversion:>

=over 4

=item * Perl arrays → C<Sidef::Types::Array::Array>

=item * Perl hashes → C<Sidef::Types::Hash::Hash>

=item * Perl code refs → C<Sidef::Types::Block::Block>

=item * Numeric scalars → C<Sidef::Types::Number::Number>

=item * String scalars → C<Sidef::Types::String::String>

=item * Blessed Perl objects → C<Sidef::Module::OO>

=item * Multiple return values → C<Sidef::Types::Array::Array> in scalar context,
individual Sidef values in list context

=back

B<Example:>

    var lu = frequire('List::Util')
    var total = lu.sum(1, 2, 3, 4, 5)
    say total   # => 15

=head1 ADVANCED EXAMPLES

=head2 Working with POSIX Functions

    var posix = frequire('POSIX')

    say posix.floor(2.9)        # => 2
    say posix.ceil(2.1)         # => 3
    say posix.round(2.5)        # => 3
    say posix.fabs(-3.14)       # => 3.14
    say posix.pow(2, 10)        # => 1024

=head2 Using List::Util Reductions

    var lu = frequire('List::Util')

    var words = ['banana', 'apple', 'cherry']
    var longest = lu.reduce({ |a, b| a.len > b.len ? a : b }, words...)
    say longest     # => banana

    say lu.any({ _ > 5 }, 1, 3, 7, 2)   # => true
    say lu.all({ _ > 0 }, 1, 2, 3)       # => true
    say lu.none({ _ < 0 }, 1, 2, 3)      # => true

=head2 Calling Module Functions with Sidef Values

    # Sidef values are automatically converted to their underlying Perl representations
    var su = frequire('Scalar::Util')
    var num = 3.14
    say su.looks_like_number(num)   # => 1

=head2 Combining frequire with require

    # Load a functional module and an OO module together
    var list_util = frequire('List::Util')
    var date_mod  = require('POSIX')

    var values = [5, 2, 8, 1, 9, 3]
    say list_util.max(values...)    # => 9
    say list_util.min(values...)    # => 1

=head2 Using Data::Dumper for Debugging

    var dd = frequire('Data::Dumper')
    var data = [1, [2, 3], {key => 'value'}]
    say dd.Dumper(data)

=head1 SEE ALSO

=over 4

=item * L<Sidef::Module::OO> - Object-oriented interface for Perl modules

=item * L<Sidef::Types::Perl::Perl> - Evaluating Perl code and converting data structures

=item * L<Sidef::Object::Convert> - Conversion helpers (C<to_caller> / C<to_fcaller>)

=item * L<Sidef::Types::String::String> - The C<require> and C<frequire> string methods

=back

=head1 AUTHOR

Daniel "Trizen" Șuteu

=head1 LICENSE

This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the same terms as Sidef itself.

=cut
