=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

Sidef::Module::OO - Object-oriented interface for Perl modules used from Sidef

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This class provides a transparent object-oriented bridge between Sidef and Perl, allowing
blessed Perl objects to be used naturally within Sidef code. It is the underlying mechanism
that powers Sidef's C<require()> built-in function and the C<%O> / C<%s> module literal syntax.

When a Perl module is loaded with C<require()>, the resulting object is an instance of
C<Sidef::Module::OO>. Any method call on that object is automatically dispatched via
C<AUTOLOAD> to the underlying Perl object, with arguments and return values transparently
converted between Sidef and Perl types.

The class also handles Perl objects returned by C<Sidef::Types::Perl::Perl>'s C<to_sidef>
conversion: any blessed reference that has no special-cased Sidef equivalent is automatically
wrapped in a C<Sidef::Module::OO> instance.

=head1 SYNOPSIS

=head2 Loading an OO Perl Module

    # require() returns a Sidef::Module::OO wrapper around the module name
    var lwp = require('LWP::UserAgent')

    # Call new() on the module to get an instance
    var ua = lwp.new
    var resp = ua.get('https://example.com')

=head2 Shorthand Syntax

    # %O and %s are syntactic sugar for require() in the Sidef language
    var ua = %O<LWP::UserAgent>.new

=head2 Calling Methods

    var ua = require('LWP::UserAgent').new
    ua.agent('MyScraper/1.0')
    var resp = ua.get('https://example.com')

    if (resp.is_success) {
        say resp.decoded_content
    }

=head2 Working with Blessed Objects from Perl

    # Blessed Perl objects returned through Perl.eval are also wrapped automatically
    var dt = Perl.eval('
        use DateTime;
        DateTime->new(year => 2024, month => 6, day => 1)
    ')

    say dt.year     # => 2024
    say dt.month    # => 6

=head2 String Representation

    var mod = require('HTTP::Tiny')
    say mod          # stringifies using the wrapped object's own stringification

=head1 METHODS

=head2 __NEW__

    Sidef::Module::OO->__NEW__($module)

Constructs a new C<Sidef::Module::OO> wrapper around the given Perl value. The argument may
be either a module name (string) or any blessed Perl object.

B<Parameters:>

=over 4

=item * C<$module> - A Perl module name (string) or blessed Perl object to wrap

=back

B<Returns:> A new C<Sidef::Module::OO> object

B<Note:> This constructor is used internally by the Sidef runtime. In Sidef code, use
C<require()> or the C<%O>/ C<%s> syntax instead of calling C<__NEW__> directly.

=head2 AUTOLOAD

    $oo_obj->some_method(@args)

All method calls on a C<Sidef::Module::OO> object are intercepted by C<AUTOLOAD> and
forwarded to the wrapped Perl object. Arguments are automatically converted from their
Sidef types to Perl values before the call, and the return values are automatically
converted back to Sidef types using C<Sidef::Types::Perl::Perl-E<gt>to_sidef>.

B<Argument Conversion:>

=over 4

=item * Other C<Sidef::Module::OO> objects → the unwrapped Perl object they contain

=item * Sidef objects (C<Sidef::*>) → the underlying Perl value via C<get_value>

=item * Plain Perl values → passed through unchanged

=back

B<Return Value Conversion:>

=over 4

=item * Perl arrays → C<Sidef::Types::Array::Array>

=item * Perl hashes → C<Sidef::Types::Hash::Hash>

=item * Perl code refs → C<Sidef::Types::Block::Block>

=item * Numeric scalars → C<Sidef::Types::Number::Number>

=item * String scalars → C<Sidef::Types::String::String>

=item * Blessed Perl objects → C<Sidef::Module::OO>

=item * Multiple return values → C<Sidef::Types::Array::Array> in scalar context,
individual Sidef values in list context

=back

B<Example:>

    var file_spec = require('File::Spec')
    var path = file_spec.catfile(file_spec.tmpdir, 'sidef.txt')
    say path

=head1 ADVANCED EXAMPLES

=head2 Using an OO Module with Chained Calls

    var ua = require('LWP::UserAgent').new
    ua.timeout(10)
    ua.agent('MyClient/1.0')
    var resp = ua.get('https://httpbin.org/get')
    say resp.code       # => 200
    say resp.message    # => OK

=head2 Passing Sidef Values to Perl Methods

    var file_obj = require('IO::File').new('/etc/hostname', 'r')
    var line = file_obj.getline
    say line.chomp      # => myhostname

=head2 Returning Multiple Values

    # In list context, multiple return values become individual Sidef values
    var file_spec = require('File::Spec')
    var temp_file = file_spec.catfile(file_spec.tmpdir, 'sidef.txt')
    var (volume, directories, file) = file_spec.splitpath(temp_file)

=head2 Objects Returned from Perl Evaluation

    var obj = Perl.eval('
        package Counter;
        sub new  { bless { count => 0 }, shift }
        sub inc  { $_[0]{count}++ }
        sub get  { $_[0]{count} }
        Counter->new
    ')

    obj.inc
    obj.inc
    obj.inc
    say obj.get     # => 3

=head1 SEE ALSO

=over 4

=item * L<Sidef::Module::Func> - Functional (non-OO) interface for Perl modules

=item * L<Sidef::Types::Perl::Perl> - Evaluating Perl code and converting data structures

=item * L<Sidef::Object::Convert> - Conversion helpers (C<to_caller> / C<to_fcaller>)

=item * L<Sidef::Types::String::String> - The C<require> and C<frequire> string methods

=back

=cut
