
=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

Sidef::Time::Localtime

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Returned values are localized for your current location.

=head1 SYNOPSIS

    var time = (Time.local);

=head1 INHERITS

Inherits methods from:

    * Sidef

=head1 METHODS


=head2 ctime

Time.local.ctime() -> I<String>

Return the ctime(3) value:

    Time.local.ctime    # e.g., "Thu Jul 18 20:39:47 2013"

=cut

=head2 day

Time.local.day() -> I<Number>

Return the day of the month,

=cut

=head2 hour

Time.local.hour() -> I<Number>

Return the hours of the specified time.

=cut

=head2 isdst

Time.local.isdst() -> I<Number>

Return 1 if the specified time occurs during Daylight Saving Time, 0 otherwise.

=cut

=head2 mday

Alias for L<C<day()>|"day">.

=cut

=head2 min

Time.local.min() -> I<Number>

Return the minutes of the specified time.

=cut

=head2 mon

Time.local.mon() -> I<Number>

Return the month in the range 0..11, with 0 indicating January and 11 indicating December.

=cut

=head2 month

Alias for L<C<mon()>|"mon">.

=cut

=head2 sec

Time.local.sec() -> I<Number>

Return the seconds of the specified time.

=cut

=head2 strftime

Time.local.strftime(I<String>) -> I<String>

Format the time with I<POSIX::strftime()>.

    Time.local.strftime("%a %b %e %H:%M:%S %Y")    # e.g., "Thu Jul 18 20:45:04 2013"

For more details, see: C<man strftime>

=cut

=head2 wday

Time.local.wday() -> I<Number>

Return the day of the week, with 0 indicating Sunday and 3 indicating Wednesday.

=cut

=head2 yday

Time.local.yday() -> I<Number>

Return the day of the year, in the range 0..364 (or 0..365 in leap years.)

=cut

=head2 year

Time.local.year() -> I<Number>

Return the number of years since 1900.

To get a 4-digit year, write:

   var year = (Time.gmtime.year + 1900);

=cut
