=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

Sidef::Types::Hash::Hash

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This class implements a hash (associative array) data type, providing key-value storage and various methods for hash manipulation, iteration, transformation, and set operations.

A Hash is an unordered collection of key-value pairs where each unique key maps to exactly one value. Keys are compared using structural equality.

=head1 SYNOPSIS

    # Creating hashes
    var hash = Hash(a => 1, b => 2, c => 3)
    var h = Hash(:foo, :bar)  # Keys with nil values

    # Accessing values
    say hash{:a}        #=> 1
    say hash.item(:b)   #=> 2

    # Setting values
    hash{:d} = 4
    hash.append(e => 5, f => 6)

    # Basic operations
    say hash.keys       #=> [:a, :b, :c, :d, :e, :f]
    say hash.values     #=> [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]
    say hash.len        #=> 6
    say hash.has(:a)    #=> true

    # Iteration
    hash.each { |key, value|
        say "#{key} => #{value}"
    }

    # Transformation
    var doubled  = hash.map_v { _1 * 2 }
    var filtered = hash.grep { |k, v| v > 2 }

    # Set operations
    var h1 = Hash(a => 1, b => 2)
    var h2 = Hash(b => 3, c => 4)

    say (h1 | h2)   #=> Hash(a => 1, b => 2, c => 4)  # Union
    say (h1 & h2)   #=> Hash(b => 2)                  # Intersection
    say (h1 - h2)   #=> Hash(a => 1)                  # Difference
    say (h1 ^ h2)   #=> Hash(a => 1, c => 4)          # Symmetric difference

=head1 INHERITS

Inherits methods from:

       * Sidef::Object::Object

=head1 CONSTRUCTION

=head2 new

    Hash.new
    Hash.new(pairs...)

Creates and returns a new Hash object, optionally initialized with the given key-value pairs.

    var h1 = Hash.new
    var h2 = Hash.new(a => 1, b => 2)
    var h3 = Hash(a => 1, b => 2)  # Shorthand

Aliases: I<call>

=cut

=head1 ACCESSING VALUES

=head2 item

    hash.item(key)

Returns the value associated with the given key, or nil if the key does not exist.

    var h = Hash(a => 1, b => 2)

    say h.item(:a)  #=> 1
    say h.item(:z)  #=> nil

This is equivalent to subscript notation: C<hash{key}>.

=cut

=head2 items

    hash.items(keys...)

Returns an Array of values for the specified keys. Returns nil for keys that do not exist.

    var h = Hash(a => 1, b => 2, c => 3)
    say h.items(:a, :c, :z)  #=> [1, 3, nil]

=cut

=head2 fetch

    hash.fetch(key, default)

Returns the value for the given key if it exists; otherwise returns the default value.

    var h = Hash(a => 1, b => 2)

    say h.fetch(:a, 0)    #=> 1
    say h.fetch(:z, 0)    #=> 0
    say h.fetch(:z, nil)  #=> nil

Unlike direct subscript access (C<hash{key}>), C<fetch> allows you to distinguish between a missing key and a key whose value is nil.

=cut

=head2 dig

    hash.dig(key, keys...)

Recursively retrieves a nested value by traversing a chain of keys. Returns the value at the nested key path, or nil if any key in the path does not exist.

    var h = Hash(
        a => Hash(
            b => Hash(
                c => 42
            )
        )
    )

    say h.dig(:a, :b, :c)  #=> 42
    say h.dig(:a, :x)      #=> nil

This is safer than chaining subscript operations when intermediate keys may be absent.

=cut

=head1 TESTING AND COUNTING

=head2 has

    hash.has(key)

Returns true if the given key exists in the hash, false otherwise.

    var h = Hash(a => 1, b => nil)

    say h.has(:a)  #=> true
    say h.has(:b)  #=> true  (key exists even with nil value)
    say h.has(:z)  #=> false

Aliases: I<exists>, I<has_key>, I<haskey>, I<contain>, I<contains>, I<include>, I<includes>

=cut

=head2 is_empty

    hash.is_empty

Returns true if the hash contains no key-value pairs, false otherwise.

    var h1 = Hash()
    var h2 = Hash(a => 1)

    say h1.is_empty  #=> true
    say h2.is_empty  #=> false

=cut

=head2 same_keys

    hash.same_keys(other)

Returns true if the hash has exactly the same set of keys as C<other> (another hash), false otherwise. Values are not compared.

    var h1 = Hash(a => 1, b => 2)
    var h2 = Hash(a => 10, b => 20)
    var h3 = Hash(a => 1, c => 3)

    say h1.same_keys(h2)  #=> true
    say h1.same_keys(h3)  #=> false

=cut

=head2 len

    hash.len

Returns the number of key-value pairs in the hash.

    var h = Hash(a => 1, b => 2, c => 3)
    say h.len  #=> 3

Aliases: I<size>, I<length>

=cut

=head2 count

    hash.count(key)
    hash.count { |key, value| ... }

When called with a key, returns 1 if the key exists in the hash, 0 otherwise.

When called with a block, returns the number of key-value pairs for which the block returns true.

    var h = Hash(a => 1, b => 2, c => 3, d => 4)

    say h.count(:b)                #=> 1
    say h.count(:z)                #=> 0
    say h.count { |k, v| v > 2 }  #=> 2

=cut

=head2 count_by

    hash.count_by { |key, value| ... }

Returns the number of key-value pairs for which the block returns a true value. The block receives (key, value) as arguments.

    var h = Hash(a => 1, b => 2, c => 3, d => 4)
    say h.count_by { |k, v| v.is_even }  #=> 2

=cut

=head1 KEYS, VALUES, AND PAIRS

=head2 keys

    hash.keys

Returns an Array containing all keys in the hash.

    var h = Hash(a => 1, b => 2, c => 3)
    say h.keys  #=> [:a, :b, :c]

Note: Hash keys are unordered, so the order of keys in the returned array is not guaranteed.

=cut

=head2 values

    hash.values

Returns an Array containing all values in the hash.

    var h = Hash(a => 1, b => 2, c => 3)
    say h.values  #=> [1, 2, 3]

Note: Since hash keys are unordered, the order of values in the returned array is not guaranteed.

=cut

=head2 kv

    hash.kv

Returns an Array of Pair objects, where each Pair contains a key and its associated value.

    var h = Hash(a => 1, b => 2)
    say h.kv  #=> [Pair(:a, 1), Pair(:b, 2)]

    # Useful for iteration with destructuring
    h.kv.each { |pair|
        say "#{pair.key} => #{pair.value}"
    }

Aliases: I<to_a>, I<pairs>, I<to_array>

=cut

=head2 get_pair

    hash.get_pair(key)

Returns a Pair object containing the given key and its associated value.

    var h = Hash(a => 1, b => 2)
    var p = h.get_pair(:a)
    say p        #=> Pair(:a, 1)
    say p.key    #=> :a
    say p.value  #=> 1

Returns a Pair with a nil value if the key does not exist.

=cut

=head2 get_pairs

    hash.get_pairs(keys...)

Returns an Array of Pair objects for the specified keys.

    var h = Hash(a => 1, b => 2, c => 3)
    var pairs = h.get_pairs(:a, :c)
    say pairs  #=> [Pair(:a, 1), Pair(:c, 3)]

Missing keys produce Pair objects with nil values.

=cut

=head2 slice

    hash.slice(keys...)

Returns a new hash containing only the specified keys and their values from the original hash. Keys that do not exist in the original hash are omitted from the result.

    var h = Hash(a => 1, b => 2, c => 3, d => 4)
    var subset = h.slice(:a, :c, :z)
    say subset  #=> Hash(a => 1, c => 3)

Note: Key C<:z> was omitted because it does not exist in the original hash. See C<lsel> for a version that includes nil values for missing keys.

=cut

=head2 lsel

    hash.lsel(keys_array)

Performs a linear selection: returns a new hash containing the keys specified in C<keys_array>. Unlike C<slice>, keys that do not exist in the original hash are included in the result with nil values.

    var h = Hash(a => 1, b => 2)
    var selected = h.lsel([:a, :c])
    say selected  #=> Hash(a => 1, c => nil)

The argument must be an Array (or any object responding to C<to_list>).

Aliases: I<linsel>, I<linear_selection>

=cut

=head1 MODIFYING THE HASH

=head2 append

    hash.append(pairs...)

Appends the given key-value pairs to the hash in-place and returns the modified hash. If a key already exists, its value is updated.

    var h = Hash(a => 1)
    h.append(b => 2, c => 3)
    say h  #=> Hash(a => 1, b => 2, c => 3)

=cut

=head2 clear

    hash.clear

Removes all key-value pairs from the hash in-place and returns the now-empty hash.

    var h = Hash(a => 1, b => 2)
    h.clear
    say h      #=> Hash()
    say h.len  #=> 0

=cut

=head2 delete

    hash.delete(keys...)

Removes the specified keys from the hash in-place and returns the deleted values as an Array (or a single value if only one key was given).

    var h = Hash(a => 1, b => 2, c => 3)
    say h.delete(:b)      #=> 2
    say h.delete(:a, :c)  #=> [1, 3]
    say h                 #=> Hash()

Aliases: I<remove>

=cut

=head2 delete_if

    hash.delete_if { |key, value| ... }

Deletes all key-value pairs for which the block returns true. The block receives (key, value) as arguments. Returns the modified hash.

    var h = Hash(a => 1, b => 2, c => 3, d => 4)
    h.delete_if { |k, v| v.is_even }
    say h  #=> Hash(a => 1, c => 3)

This is the in-place counterpart to C<grep>, which returns a new filtered hash instead of modifying the original.

=cut

=head2 set_keys

    hash.set_keys(keys...)

Sets the specified keys to nil in the hash in-place and returns the modified hash.

    var h = Hash(a => 1)
    h.set_keys(:b, :c)
    say h  #=> Hash(a => 1, b => nil, c => nil)

This is useful for pre-initializing keys before assigning their actual values.

=cut

=head2 merge_values

    hash.merge_values(other_hash)

Updates the values in the hash for keys that also exist in C<other_hash>. Only keys already present in the original hash are affected; no new keys are added. Modifies the hash in-place and returns it.

    var h1 = Hash(a => 1, b => 2, c => 3)
    var h2 = Hash(b => 20, c => 30, d => 40)

    h1.merge_values(h2)
    say h1  #=> Hash(a => 1, b => 20, c => 30)

Note: Key C<:d> from C<h2> was not added because it did not already exist in C<h1>.

=cut

=head1 ITERATION

=head2 each

    hash.each { |key, value| ... }
    hash.each

Iterates over each key-value pair in the hash, calling the block with (key, value). When called without a block, acts as a stateful iterator, returning one key-value pair per call (or nil when the iteration is exhausted).

    var h = Hash(a => 1, b => 2, c => 3)

    h.each { |k, v|
        say "#{k} => #{v}"
    }

    # Stateful iterator usage
    loop {
        var (k, v) = h.each \\ break
        say "#{k} => #{v}"
    }

Aliases: I<each_kv>, I<each_pair>

=cut

=head2 each_k

    hash.each_k { |key| ... }

Iterates over each key in the hash, calling the block with the key. Returns the hash.

    var h = Hash(a => 1, b => 2, c => 3)
    h.each_k { |k|
        say k
    }

Aliases: I<each_key>

=cut

=head2 each_v

    hash.each_v { |value| ... }

Iterates over each value in the hash, calling the block with the value. Returns the hash.

    var h = Hash(a => 1, b => 2, c => 3)
    h.each_v { |v|
        say v * 2
    }

Aliases: I<each_value>

=cut

=head1 TRANSFORMATION AND FILTERING

=head2 map

    hash.map { |key, value| ... }

Transforms the hash by applying the block to each key-value pair. The block receives (key, value) and should return a new key-value pair as a flat two-element list. Returns a new hash built from the collected pairs.

    var h = Hash(a => 1, b => 2)
    var mapped = h.map { |k, v|
        (k.uc, v * 10)
    }
    say mapped  #=> Hash(A => 10, B => 20)

Aliases: I<map_kv>

=cut

=head2 map_v

    hash.map_v { |key, value| ... }

Returns a new hash with the same keys but with values transformed by the block. The block receives (key, value) and should return the new value.

    var h = Hash(a => 1, b => 2, c => 3)
    var doubled = h.map_v { |k, v| v * 2 }
    say doubled  #=> Hash(a => 2, b => 4, c => 6)

    # The block may also take just the value
    var squared = h.map_v { _1 ** 2 }
    say squared  #=> Hash(a => 1, b => 4, c => 9)

Aliases: I<map_val>

=cut

=head2 grep

    hash.grep { |key, value| ... }

Returns a new hash containing only the key-value pairs for which the block returns true. The block receives (key, value) as arguments.

    var h = Hash(a => 1, b => 2, c => 3, d => 4)
    var evens = h.grep { |k, v| v.is_even }
    say evens  #=> Hash(b => 2, d => 4)

This is the non-destructive counterpart to C<delete_if>.

Aliases: I<grep_kv>, I<select>

=cut

=head2 grep_v

    hash.grep_v { |value| ... }

Returns a new hash containing only the key-value pairs for which the block (called with the value only) returns true.

    var h = Hash(a => 1, b => 2, c => 3, d => 4)
    var evens = h.grep_v { .is_even }
    say evens  #=> Hash(b => 2, d => 4)

Aliases: I<grep_val>

=cut

=head2 collect

    hash.collect { |key, value| ... }

Iterates over each key-value pair, calling the block with (key, value), and collects all return values into a new Array.

    var h = Hash(a => 1, b => 2, c => 3)
    var result = h.collect { |k, v|
        "#{k}=#{v}"
    }
    say result  #=> ["a=1", "b=2", "c=3"]

Aliases: I<collect_kv>

=cut

=head2 flip

    hash.flip

Returns a new hash with keys and values swapped. The original values become the new keys, and the original keys become the new values.

    var h = Hash(a => 1, b => 2, c => 3)
    say h.flip  #=> Hash(1 => :a, 2 => :b, 3 => :c)

Note: If multiple keys share the same value, only one key-value pair will survive in the flipped hash (the last one encountered wins).

Aliases: I<invert>, I<reverse>

=cut

=head1 SORTING

=head2 sort

    hash.sort
    hash.sort { |a, b| ... }

Returns an Array of Pairs sorted by key. When no block is given, keys are sorted in lexicographic order. When a block is provided, it is used as a comparator for the keys.

    var h = Hash(c => 3, a => 1, b => 2)
    say h.sort  #=> [Pair(:a, 1), Pair(:b, 2), Pair(:c, 3)]

    # Custom comparator (reverse order)
    var rev = h.sort { |a, b| b <=> a }
    say rev  #=> [Pair(:c, 3), Pair(:b, 2), Pair(:a, 1)]

=cut

=head2 sort_by

    hash.sort_by { |key, value| ... }

Returns an Array of Pairs sorted by the values returned by the block. The block receives (key, value) as arguments.

    var h = Hash(a => 3, b => 1, c => 2)
    var sorted = h.sort_by { |k, v| v }
    say sorted  #=> [Pair(:b, 1), Pair(:c, 2), Pair(:a, 3)]

    # Sort by key length
    var by_len = h.sort_by { |k, v| k.len }

=cut

=head2 min_by

    hash.min_by { |key, value| ... }

Returns the key-value Pair for which the block returns the minimum value. The block receives (key, value) as arguments.

    var h = Hash(a => 3, b => 1, c => 5, d => 2)
    var min_pair = h.min_by { |k, v| v }
    say min_pair  #=> Pair(:b, 1)

=cut

=head2 max_by

    hash.max_by { |key, value| ... }

Returns the key-value Pair for which the block returns the maximum value. The block receives (key, value) as arguments.

    var h = Hash(a => 3, b => 1, c => 5, d => 2)
    var max_pair = h.max_by { |k, v| v }
    say max_pair  #=> Pair(:c, 5)

=cut

=head1 OPERATORS

=head2 ==

    hash1 == hash2

Returns true if both hashes have the same keys with equal values (structural equality).

    var h1 = Hash(a => 1, b => 2)
    var h2 = Hash(b => 2, a => 1)
    say (h1 == h2)  #=> true

Aliases: I<eq>

=cut

=head2 ≠

    hash1 ≠ hash2

Returns true if the two hashes are not structurally equal (different keys or different values).

    var h1 = Hash(a => 1)
    var h2 = Hash(a => 2)
    say (h1 ≠ h2)  #=> true

Aliases: I<!=>, I<ne>

=cut

=head2 +

    hash1 + hash2

Returns a new hash containing all key-value pairs from both hashes. If a key exists in both, the value from the second hash takes precedence (right-hand side wins).

    var h1 = Hash(a => 1, b => 2)
    var h2 = Hash(b => 20, c => 30)
    say (h1 + h2)  #=> Hash(a => 1, b => 20, c => 30)

Aliases: I<merge>, I<concat>

=cut

=head2 -

    hash1 - hash2

Returns the set difference of two hashes. The result contains only keys that exist in the first hash but not in the second.

    var h1 = Hash(a => 1, b => 2, c => 3)
    var h2 = Hash(b => 20, d => 40)
    say (h1 - h2)  #=> Hash(a => 1, c => 3)

Aliases: I<sub>, I<diff>, I<difference>

=cut

=head2 &

    hash1 & hash2

Returns the intersection of two hashes. The result contains only keys that exist in both hashes, with values taken from the first hash.

    var h1 = Hash(a => 1, b => 2, c => 3)
    var h2 = Hash(b => 20, c => 30, d => 40)
    say (h1 & h2)  #=> Hash(b => 2, c => 3)

Aliases: I<and>, I<intersection>

=cut

=head2 |

    hash1 | hash2

Returns the union of two hashes. The result contains all keys from both hashes; for keys present in both, the value from the first hash takes precedence (left-hand side wins).

    var h1 = Hash(a => 1, b => 2)
    var h2 = Hash(b => 20, c => 30)
    say (h1 | h2)  #=> Hash(a => 1, b => 2, c => 30)

Note the difference from C<+> (merge): union keeps the left-hand value for common keys, while merge keeps the right-hand value.

Aliases: I<or>, I<union>

=cut

=head2 ^

    hash1 ^ hash2

Returns the symmetric difference of two hashes. The result contains keys that exist in either hash but not in both.

    var h1 = Hash(a => 1, b => 2)
    var h2 = Hash(b => 20, c => 30)
    say (h1 ^ h2)  #=> Hash(a => 1, c => 30)

Aliases: I<xor>, I<symdiff>, I<symmetric_difference>

=cut

=head2 ...

    hash...

Returns the hash as a flat list of alternating keys and values. This is useful for unpacking a hash into an argument list or for converting it to other data structures.

    var h = Hash(a => 1, b => 2)
    say h...  #=> [:a, 1, :b, 2]

Aliases: I<to_list>

=cut

=head1 CONVERSION

=head2 dump

    hash.dump

Returns a string representation of the hash.

    var h = Hash(a => 1, b => 2)
    say h.dump  #=> "Hash(a => 1, b => 2)"

Aliases: I<to_s>, I<to_str>

=cut

=head2 to_set

    hash.to_set

Converts the hash's keys to a Set object. The hash values are ignored.

    var h = Hash(a => 1, b => 2, c => 3)
    var set = h.to_set
    say set  #=> Set(:a, :b, :c)

=cut

=head2 to_bag

    hash.to_bag

Converts the hash's keys to a Bag object. The hash values are ignored.

    var h = Hash(a => 1, b => 2, c => 3)
    var bag = h.to_bag
    say bag  #=> Bag(:a, :b, :c)

=cut

=head2 as_tree

    hash.as_tree(root)

Returns the hash as a tree structure represented as nested Pairs, using the given C<root> as the tree's root label. Nested hashes are recursively converted to sub-trees.

    var h = Hash(
        a => Hash(b => 1),
        c => 2
    )
    say h.as_tree(:root)
    #=> Pair(:root, [Pair(:a, [Pair(:b, [])]), Pair(:c, [])])

This is useful for visualizing or processing hashes as hierarchical data structures.

=cut

=head1 EXAMPLES

=head2 Frequency Counting

    var text = "hello world"
    var freq = Hash()

    text.each_char { |char|
        freq{char} := 0
        freq{char}++
    }

    say freq  #=> Hash(h => 1, e => 1, l => 3, ...)

=head2 Grouping Data

    var people = [
        Hash(name => "Alice", age => 30),
        Hash(name => "Bob",   age => 25),
        Hash(name => "Carol", age => 30)
    ]

    var by_age = Hash()
    people.each { |person|
        var age = person{:age}
        by_age{age} := []
        by_age{age} << person
    }

=head2 Transforming Data

    var prices = Hash(apple => 1.50, banana => 0.75, orange => 2.00)

    # Apply a discount
    var discounted = prices.map_v { _1 * 0.9 }

    # Filter expensive items
    var expensive = prices.grep { |k, v| v > 1.00 }

=head2 Merging with Custom Logic

    var defaults = Hash(color => :red, size => :medium, count => 1)
    var options  = Hash(size => :large)

    # Keep defaults for missing keys
    var config = defaults + options
    say config  #=> Hash(color => :red, size => :large, count => 1)

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<Sidef::Types::Array::Array>, L<Sidef::Types::Set::Set>, L<Sidef::Types::Bag::Bag>

=head1 AUTHOR

Daniel "Trizen" Șuteu

=head1 LICENSE

This module is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Sidef itself.

=cut
