=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

Sidef::Types::Glob::Backtick — Shell command execution via backticks

=head1 SYNOPSIS

    # Execute a shell command and capture its output
    var out = `ls -1`

    say out

    # Explicit object usage (normally implicit)
    var cmd = Backtick("uname -a")
    var out = cmd.call

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The `Sidef::Types::Glob::Backtick` class represents a **backtick expression**
in Sidef.

A backtick expression executes a command using the system shell and returns
the command's standard output as a B<string>.

This behavior is analogous to backticks in Perl or POSIX shells:

    `command`

is equivalent to executing the command in a subshell and capturing its output.

Backtick expressions are evaluated at runtime and are typically used for:

  * Querying system information
  * Interfacing with external programs
  * Capturing command output in scripts

=head1 INHERITS

This class inherits from:

  * Sidef::Object::Object

=head1 METHODS

=head2 call

    var output = obj.call

Executes the stored shell command and returns its standard output as a string.

The output includes everything written to STDOUT by the command.
Trailing newlines are preserved unless explicitly removed by the caller.

If the command fails, behavior depends on the runtime environment and shell;
typically an empty string or partial output may be returned.

=head2 run

    var output = obj.run

Alias for C<call>. This method exists for internal consistency with other
callable Sidef objects.

=head2 to_s

    var str = obj.to_s

Returns the literal command string represented by the backtick expression,
without executing it.

This is useful for debugging or introspection.

=head1 BACKTICK SYNTAX

Backtick expressions can be written directly in Sidef source code:

    var date = `date`
    var user = `whoami`
    var files = `ls *.sidef`

The command is executed by the system shell. Shell features such as pipes,
redirections, and glob expansion are handled by the shell itself, not by Sidef.

=head1 EXAMPLES

=head2 Capturing command output

    var kernel = `uname -r`
    say "Kernel: #{kernel}"

=head2 Using shell pipelines

    var count = `ps aux | wc -l`
    say count

=head2 Trimming output

    var user = `whoami`.trim
    say user

=head1 SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS

Backtick expressions execute arbitrary shell commands.

B<Never> interpolate untrusted input into backtick expressions without proper
validation or escaping, as this may lead to command injection vulnerabilities.

Example of unsafe usage:

    var name = readln
    var out  = `echo #{name}`   # dangerous

=head1 IMPLEMENTATION NOTES

Backtick expressions are represented in the AST using
C<Sidef::Types::Glob::Backtick> objects, which store the command string and
execute it when evaluated.

Command execution and output capture are delegated to the host operating
system via the shell.

=head1 SEE ALSO

  * Sidef::Types::String
  * Sidef::Types::Glob
  * Shell command execution semantics
  * Perl backticks (C<qx//>)

=cut
