=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

Sidef::Types::Glob::Pipe - Interface for creating and managing pipe handles

=head1 SYNOPSIS

    # Create a pipe for reading command output
    var pipe = Pipe("ls -la")
    pipe.open_r(\var fh)
    fh.each { |line|
        say line
    }
    fh.close

    # Create a pipe for writing to a command
    var pipe = Pipe("sort | uniq")
    pipe.open_w(\var fh)
    fh.say("banana")
    fh.say("apple")
    fh.say("banana")
    fh.say("cherry")
    fh.close

    # Alternative: using open with mode
    var pipe = Pipe("wc -l")
    pipe.open('<', \var in_fh)   # read mode
    # or
    pipe.open('>', \var out_fh)  # write mode

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The C<Pipe> class provides an interface for working with Unix-style pipes in Sidef. 
Pipes allow bidirectional communication between your Sidef program and external commands 
or processes, enabling data to flow from your program to a command (write mode) or from 
a command to your program (read mode).

This class wraps the underlying system pipe mechanisms and provides a clean, 
object-oriented interface for pipe operations.

=head1 INHERITS

Inherits methods from:

    * Sidef::Object::Object

=head1 METHODS

=head2 new

    Pipe.new(command)
    Pipe(command)

Creates a new Pipe object for the specified command string.

B<Parameters:>

=over 4

=item * C<command> - The shell command to execute (String)

=back

B<Returns:> A new Pipe object

B<Example:>

    var pipe = Pipe("grep 'error' /var/log/syslog")
    var pipe2 = Pipe.new("cat file.txt | sed 's/foo/bar/g'")

B<Note:> The command is not executed until C<open>, C<open_r>, or C<open_w> is called.

B<Aliases:> I<call>

=cut

=head2 command

    pipe.command

Returns the command string associated with this Pipe object.

B<Returns:> The command string (String)

B<Example:>

    var pipe = Pipe("ls -la")
    say pipe.command          # prints: ls -la

=cut

=head2 open

    pipe.open(mode, var_ref)

Opens the pipe in the specified mode and assigns the resulting filehandle 
to the variable reference provided.

B<Parameters:>

=over 4

=item * C<mode> - The opening mode: '<' for read, '>' for write (String)

=item * C<var_ref> - A reference to a variable that will receive the filehandle

=back

B<Returns:> The filehandle object

B<Example:>

    var pipe = Pipe("grep pattern file.txt")
    pipe.open('<', \var fh)    # open for reading
    
    var output_pipe = Pipe("sort")
    output_pipe.open('>', \var out)  # open for writing

B<Note:> The mode parameter follows Perl/Unix conventions:
    '<' or 'r' for read mode (input from command)
    '>' or 'w' for write mode (output to command)

=cut

=head2 open_r

    pipe.open_r(var_ref)

Opens the pipe in read mode, allowing your program to read output from the command. 
This is equivalent to C<open('<', var_ref)>.

B<Parameters:>

=over 4

=item * C<var_ref> - A reference to a variable that will receive the filehandle

=back

B<Returns:> The filehandle object configured for reading

B<Example:>

    var pipe = Pipe("ps aux | grep sidef")
    pipe.open_r(\var fh)
    
    fh.each { |line|
        say "Process: #{line}"
    }
    fh.close

B<Use Case:> Use this when you want to capture and process output from 
a shell command within your Sidef program.

B<Aliases:> I<open_read>

=cut

=head2 open_w

    pipe.open_w(var_ref)

Opens the pipe in write mode, allowing your program to send data to the command's 
standard input. This is equivalent to C<open('>', var_ref)>.

B<Parameters:>

=over 4

=item * C<var_ref> - A reference to a variable that will receive the filehandle

=back

B<Returns:> The filehandle object configured for writing

B<Example:>

    var pipe = Pipe("mail -s 'Report' user@example.com")
    pipe.open_w(\var fh)
    
    fh.say("This is the report content.")
    fh.say("Generated at: #{Time.local}")
    fh.close

B<Use Case:> Use this when you want to pipe data from your Sidef program 
into another command for processing.

B<Aliases:> I<open_write>

=cut

=head2 to_s

    pipe.to_s

Returns a string representation of the Pipe object, typically showing 
the command it encapsulates.

B<Returns:> String representation of the Pipe object

B<Example:>

    var pipe = Pipe("echo 'hello'")
    say pipe.to_s             # shows Pipe object info
    say pipe.dump             # same output

B<Aliases:> I<dump>, I<to_str>

=cut

=head1 USAGE EXAMPLES

=head2 Reading from a Pipe

    # Execute a command and read its output line by line
    var pipe = Pipe("find /etc -name '*.conf'")
    pipe.open_r(\var fh)
    
    var count = 0
    fh.each { |line|
        say line.trim
        ++count
    }
    fh.close
    
    say "Found #{count} configuration files"

=head2 Writing to a Pipe

    # Send data to a command for processing
    var data = %w(zebra apple mango banana kiwi)
    var pipe = Pipe("sort -r")
    pipe.open_w(\var fh)
    
    data.each { |item|
        fh.say(item)
    }
    fh.close

=head2 Complex Pipeline

    # Chain multiple commands together
    var pipe = Pipe("ps aux | awk '{print $2, $11}' | sort -n")
    pipe.open_r(\var fh)
    
    say "PID\tCommand"
    say "=" * 40
    fh.each { |line|
        say line
    }
    fh.close

=head2 Error Handling

    # Always check if pipe operations succeed
    var pipe = Pipe("some-command")
    
    try {
        pipe.open_r(\var fh)
        fh.each { |line| say line }
        fh.close
    } catch {
        say "Error: #{_}"
    }

=head1 COMPARISON WITH FILE OPERATIONS

While C<FileHandle> deals with regular files on disk, C<Pipe> works with 
commands and processes:

    # File operations
    var file = File("data.txt")
    file.open_r(\var fh)
    # reads from file
    
    # Pipe operations  
    var pipe = Pipe("cat data.txt")
    pipe.open_r(\var fh)
    # reads from command output

The key difference: Pipes execute commands and stream data to/from them, 
while FileHandles access data stored in files.

=head1 TECHNICAL NOTES

=over 4

=item * Pipes use the underlying operating system's pipe mechanism

=item * Commands are executed through the shell, so shell metacharacters are interpreted

=item * Pipe handles should be closed when finished to avoid resource leaks

=item * The command doesn't execute until the pipe is opened

=item * Write operations are buffered; close the handle to ensure all data is flushed

=back

=head1 PLATFORM CONSIDERATIONS

Pipe functionality depends on the underlying operating system:

=over 4

=item * B<Unix/Linux/macOS:> Full support for pipes with shell command execution

=item * B<Windows:> Limited pipe support; some shell features may not work as expected

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

=over 4

=item * L<Sidef::Types::Glob::File> - for file operations

=item * L<Sidef::Types::Glob::FileHandle> - for file handle operations

=item * L<Sidef::Types::Glob::Dir> - for directory operations

=item * L<Sidef::Sys::Sys> - for system-level operations

=back

=head1 AUTHOR

Daniel Șuteu (trizen)

=head1 LICENSE

This code is distributed under the terms of the Artistic License 2.0.
For more details, see the full license text at:
L<https://www.perlfoundation.org/artistic-license-20.html>

=cut
