=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

Sidef::Types::Null::Null - The Null object in Sidef

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This class implements the special "Null" object type in the Sidef programming language.

The C<Null> object represents the absence of a value or a "null" value. It is a singleton object, meaning there is only one instance of Null, analogous to C<undef> in Perl or C<null> in other languages. It is used to represent missing, undefined, or intentionally absent values in Sidef programs.

=head1 SYNOPSIS

    var obj = Null          # The unique Null object
    say obj.to_s            # Prints "null"
    if (obj == Null) { ... }

Usually, you do not need to construct Null objects manually; instead, the built-in C<Null> is used universally.

=head1 INHERITS

Inherits methods from:

    * Sidef::Object::Object

=head1 METHODS

=head2 new

    self.new

Returns the unique Null object instance.

Calling this constructor always returns the singleton Null object.

B<Aliases>: I<call>

=cut

=head2 to_s

    self.to_s

Returns the string representation of the Null object, which is always C<"null">.

B<Aliases>: I<dump>, I<to_str>

=cut

=head2 is_null

    self.is_null

Returns true, as this is the Null object.

=cut

=head2 boolean

    self.boolean

Returns false. This means the Null object evaluates as false in boolean context.

=cut

=head2 equals

    self.equals(other)

Returns true if and only if C<other> is also the Null object.

=cut

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<Sidef::Object::Object>, L<Sidef::Types::Undefined::Undefined>, L<Sidef::Types::Bool::Bool>

=head1 AUTHOR

Sidef contributors

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

Copyright (C) 2013-2025, Daniel Șuteu

This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the Artistic License 2.0.

=cut
