=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

Sidef::Types::Block::Block - Executable code block (closure) with lexical scope and callable behavior.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This class implements blocks (closures/anonymous functions) in Sidef. Blocks are fundamental constructs that encapsulate executable code and can capture variables from their surrounding scope. They are first-class objects that can be passed as arguments, returned from functions, and stored in variables.

A block's underlying C<type> is either C<block> (a plain closure, C<{ ... }>) or C<func> (a named/multiple-dispatch function, C<func name(...) { ... }>). Blocks with type C<func> support multiple dispatch: several candidate signatures (with optional type and subset constraints) can share the same name, and the first candidate whose parameters match the given arguments is invoked; if none match, a detailed dispatch error is raised.

Blocks in Sidef support:

=over 4

=item * Lexical closures with captured variables

=item * Multiple dispatch, with type- and subset-constrained parameters

=item * Lazy evaluation and memoization

=item * Functional programming patterns (map, grep, compose)

=item * Parallel execution (threads and forks)

=item * Mathematical operations (summation, product, composition)

=back

=head1 SYNOPSIS

    # Simple block creation
    var square = {|n| n * n }
    say(square(5))           #=> 25

    # Block with multiple parameters
    var add = {|a, b| a + b }
    say(add(3, 7))           #=> 10

    # Blocks as iterators
    var nums = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
    {|n| say(n) } << nums    # Print each number

    # Functional composition
    var double = {|x| x * 2 }
    var inc = {|x| x + 1 }
    var f = (double ∘ inc)
    say(f(5))                #=> 12  # (5+1)*2

    # Memoization
    var fib = {|n|
        n <= 1 ? n : (fib(n-1) + fib(n-2))
    }.cache
    say(fib(40))             # Fast due to caching

=head1 INHERITS

Inherits methods from:

       * Sidef::Object::Object

=head1 CONSTRUCTION

=head2 new

    Block.new(name: name, type: type, code: code_ref, ...)

Creates a new C<Block> object from a hash of named options. C<code> (a Perl code reference) is the essential one; C<type> defaults to C<"block"> (use C<"func"> for a multiple-dispatch function) and C<name> defaults to C<"__BLOCK__">. Other internal options (such as C<vars>, for parameter/type/subset metadata) are also accepted. Typically blocks are created using brace syntax (C<{ ... }>) or C<func> syntax rather than by calling this constructor directly.

=cut

=head1 INVOCATION

=head2 call

    block.call(*args)
    block(*args)

Calls the block with the provided arguments and returns the result. For a plain C<block>-type value this jumps straight to the underlying code; for a C<func>-type value (or one with multiple candidate signatures), this performs multiple dispatch and validates any declared return types.

    var multiply = {|a, b| a * b }
    say(multiply.call(6, 7))     #=> 42

    # Equivalent to:
    say(multiply(6, 7))          #=> 42

=cut

=head2 run

    block.run(*args)

Executes the block with the given arguments and returns the result. For C<func>-type blocks this delegates to L</call> (multiple dispatch); for plain C<block>-type values it jumps directly to the underlying code with C<@_> intact.

Aliases: I<do>

=cut

=head2 do

    block.do(*args)

Executes the block with the given arguments (if any) and returns the result.

    var result = {
        var x = 5
        var y = 10
        x + y
    }.do

    say(result)          #=> 15

Aliases: I<run>

=cut

=head2 exec

    block.exec(*args)

Runs the block with the given arguments (as L</run> would), but discards its return value and returns C<self> instead. Useful for chaining side effects.

    var greet = {|name| say("Hello, #{name}!") }
    var same_greet = greet.exec("Alice")   #=> prints "Hello, Alice!"
    # same_greet == greet

=cut

=head2 if

    block.if(condition)

If C<condition> is truthy, runs the block and returns its result; otherwise, returns C<condition> itself unchanged (without running the block).

    var action = { say("Condition was true!") }
    action.if(5 > 3)    # Executes and prints message
    action.if(5 < 3)    # Does not execute; returns false

=cut

=head2 while

    block.while(condition)

Runs the block repeatedly for as long as calling C<condition.run> returns a truthy value. Returns C<self>.

    var i = 0
    {
        say(i)
        i++
    }.while({ i < 5 })
    # Prints: 0, 1, 2, 3, 4

=cut

=head2 loop

    block.loop

Runs the block in an infinite loop, until a C<break> or C<return> control-flow statement is encountered inside it. Returns C<self>.

    var counter = 0
    {
        say(counter++)
        counter >= 5 && break
    }.loop
    # Prints: 0, 1, 2, 3, 4

=cut

=head1 IDENTITY BLOCKS

=head2 identity

    Block.identity

Returns a shared identity block that returns its single input argument unchanged.

    var id = Block.identity
    say(id(42))          #=> 42

=cut

=head2 list_identity

    Block.list_identity

Returns a shared identity block that returns all of its arguments as a list, unchanged.

    var lid = Block.list_identity
    say(lid(1, 2, 3))    #=> (1, 2, 3)

=cut

=head2 array_identity

    Block.array_identity

Returns a shared identity block that collects all of its arguments into a new C<Array>.

    var aid = Block.array_identity
    say(aid(1, 2, 3))    #=> [1, 2, 3]

=cut

=head2 null_identity

    Block.null_identity

Returns a shared identity block that ignores its arguments and returns nothing (C<nil>).

    var nid = Block.null_identity
    say(nid(1, 2, 3))    #=> nil

=cut

=head2 is_identity

    block.is_identity

Returns C<true> if the block is one of the built-in identity blocks (L</identity>, L</list_identity>, L</array_identity>, or L</null_identity>), otherwise C<false>. Ordinary user-defined blocks always return C<false>, even if they behave like an identity function.

    say(Block.identity.is_identity)    #=> true
    say({|x| x }.is_identity)          #=> false

=cut

=head1 FUNCTIONAL COMBINATORS

=head2 compose

    block_a.compose(block_b)
    block_a ∘ block_b

Returns a new block representing the composition of two blocks: calling the result is equivalent to C<block_a(block_b(*args))>.

    var double = {|x| x * 2 }
    var square = {|x| x ** 2 }
    var f = (double ∘ square)
    say(f(5))            #=> 50  # double(square(5)) = double(25) = 50

    # Multiple composition
    var inc = {|x| x + 1 }
    var g = (square ∘ double ∘ inc)
    say(g(3))            #=> 64  # square(double(inc(3))) = square(double(4)) = square(8) = 64

Aliases: operator C<∘>

=cut

=head2 ∘

    block_a ∘ block_b

Operator form of L</compose>.

Aliases: I<compose>

=cut

=head2 repeat

    block.repeat(num)
    block * num

If C<num> is a C<Number>, calls C<num.times(block)>, running the block C<num> times and collecting the results into an array. If C<num> is another C<Block>, this is equivalent to L</compose> (i.e. C<block * other_block> behaves like C<block ∘ other_block>).

    var roll_die = { 6.rand.int + 1 }
    var rolls = (roll_die * 10)
    say(rolls)           #=> [3, 1, 6, 2, 5, 4, 1, 6, 3, 2]

Aliases: operator C<*>

=cut

=head2 *

    block * num

Operator form of L</repeat>.

Aliases: I<repeat>

=cut

=head2 cache

    block.cache

Returns a memoized version of the block that caches results based on input arguments. Subsequent calls with the same arguments return cached results instead of recomputing. Modifies and returns C<self>.

    var expensive = {|n|
        say("Computing fib(#{n})")
        n <= 1 ? n : (expensive(n-1) + expensive(n-2))
    }.cache

    say(expensive(5))    # Computes only once per unique input
    say(expensive(5))    # Returns cached result

=cut

=head2 uncache

    block.uncache

Removes memoization from a previously cached block, so that subsequent calls are recomputed instead of using cached results. Modifies and returns C<self>; has no effect if the block is not cached.

    var cached = {|n| n * 2 }.cache
    var uncached = cached.uncache
    # uncached will recompute each time

=cut

=head2 flush_cache

    block.flush_cache

Clears the memoization cache for a cached block, forcing recomputation on subsequent calls, without removing its cached status. Returns C<self>; has no effect if the block is not cached.

    var block = {|n|
        say("Computing...")
        n * 2
    }.cache

    block(5)            # Prints "Computing..."
    block(5)            # Uses cache
    block.flush_cache
    block(5)            # Prints "Computing..." again

=cut

=head1 ITERATION

The methods in this section are defined on C<Block>, so the block is always the invocant (and the left-hand operand of the corresponding operator): C<block.map(iterable)> / C<block E<gt>E<gt> iterable>, not the other way around. Container types such as C<Array> or C<Range> separately provide the more commonly seen calling convention (e.g. C<iterable.map{ ... }>).

=head2 for

    block.for(*iterables)
    block << iterable

Calls the block once for each element produced by the given iterable object(s) (arrays, ranges, and so on), for side effects. If the block performs a C<break>-like exit, iteration over the remaining iterables stops. Returns C<self>.

    var numbers = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
    {|n| say("Number: #{n}") } << numbers
    # Outputs:
    # Number: 1
    # Number: 2
    # Number: 3
    # Number: 4
    # Number: 5

Aliases: I<each>, I<foreach>, operator C<< << >>

=cut

=head2 each

    block.each(*iterables)

Alias for L</for>.

Aliases: I<for>, I<foreach>

=cut

=head2 foreach

    block.foreach(*iterables)

Alias for L</for>.

Aliases: I<for>, I<each>

=cut

=head2 <<

    block << iterable

Operator form of L</for>. The block is the left-hand operand.

Aliases: I<for>, I<each>, I<foreach>

=cut

=head2 map

    block.map(*iterables)
    block >> iterable

Calls the block once for each element produced by the given iterable object(s), collecting the returned values into a new C<Array>.

    var numbers = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
    var squares = ({|n| n * n } >> numbers)
    say(squares)         #=> [1, 4, 9, 16, 25]

Aliases: operator C<< >> >>

=cut

=head2 >>

    block >> iterable

Operator form of L</map>. The block is the left-hand operand.

Aliases: I<map>

=cut

=head2 grep

    block.grep(*iterables)
    block & iterable

Calls the block once for each element produced by the given iterable object(s), collecting into a new C<Array> only the elements for which the block returned a truthy value.

    var nums = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]
    var evens = ({|n| n.is_even } & nums)
    say(evens)           #=> [2, 4, 6]

Aliases: operator C<&>

=cut

=head2 &

    block & iterable

Operator form of L</grep>. The block is the left-hand operand.

Aliases: I<grep>

=cut

=head2 first

    block.first(n=1, range=(0..Inf))

Uses the block as a predicate and returns the first C<n> elements of C<range> for which it returns a truthy value, as an C<Array>. If C<n> is omitted, returns the single first matching element directly (not wrapped in an array).

    var is_even = {|n| n.is_even }
    say(is_even.first(3, 1..10))    #=> [2, 4, 6]
    say(is_even.first(nil, 1..10))  #=> 2

=cut

=head2 nth

    block.nth(n, range=(0..Inf))

Uses the block as a predicate and returns the C<n>-th (1-indexed) element of C<range> for which it returns a truthy value, or C<nil> if no such element exists or if C<n> is not a positive number.

    var is_even = {|n| n.is_even }
    say(is_even.nth(3, 1..10))      #=> 6  # the 3rd even number in the range

=cut

=head2 nest

    block.nest(n, value=0)

Applies the block C<n> times, feeding the result of each application into the next as its argument, starting from C<value>. Returns the final result.

    var double = {|x| x * 2 }
    say(double.nest(3, 5))       #=> 40  # 5 -> 10 -> 20 -> 40

    var inc = {|x| x + 1 }
    say(inc.nest(10, 0))         #=> 10

=cut

=head1 AGGREGATION

=head2 sum

    block.sum(range)

Calculates the sum of all values returned by calling the block for each value in C<range> (equivalent to C<range.sum_by(block)>).

    var identity = {|n| n }
    say(identity.sum(1..10))       #=> 55  # Sum of 1 to 10

    var squares = {|n| n**2 }
    say(squares.sum(1..5))         #=> 55  # 1+4+9+16+25

Aliases: I<Σ>

=cut

=head2 Σ

    block.Σ(range)

Alias for L</sum>.

Aliases: I<sum>

=cut

=head2 prod

    block.prod(range)

Calculates the product of all values returned by calling the block for each value in C<range> (equivalent to C<range.prod_by(block)>).

    var factorial = {|n| n }
    say(factorial.prod(1..5))      #=> 120  # 1*2*3*4*5

    var prod = {|n| n**2 }
    say(prod.prod(1..4))           #=> 576  # 1*4*9*16

Aliases: I<Π>

=cut

=head2 Π

    block.Π(range)

Alias for L</prod>.

Aliases: I<prod>

=cut

=head1 SEARCHING

=head2 bsearch

    block.bsearch(from=0, upto=nil)

Performs a binary search for a value satisfying the block, used as the underlying comparison function for C<Number>'s own C<bsearch>. C<from> defaults to C<0>; if C<upto> is omitted, it is computed automatically and the search range is doubled repeatedly until a satisfying value is bracketed within it. Returns the found value, or C<-1> if the search space is exhausted.

    var find_sqrt = {|x| x**2 <=> 50 }
    say(find_sqrt.bsearch())   #=> a value x where x**2 is close to 50

=cut

=head2 bsearch_le

    block.bsearch_le(from=0, upto=nil)

Like L</bsearch>, but delegates to C<Number>'s C<bsearch_le>: finds the greatest value for which the block's result is less than or equal to zero.

    var block = {|x| 50 - x**2 }
    say(block.bsearch_le())    #=> 7  # Last x where 50-x^2 >= 0

=cut

=head2 bsearch_ge

    block.bsearch_ge(from=0, upto=nil)

Like L</bsearch>, but delegates to C<Number>'s C<bsearch_ge>: finds the smallest value for which the block's result is greater than or equal to zero.

    var block = {|x| x**2 - 30 }
    say(block.bsearch_ge())    #=> 6  # First x where x^2 >= 30

=cut

=head2 bsearch_inverse

    block.bsearch_inverse(from=0, upto=nil)

Like L</bsearch>, but delegates to C<Number>'s C<bsearch_inverse>: finds a value whose image under the block matches the target used by the inverse search.

    var square = {|x| x**2 }
    say(square.bsearch_inverse())  #=> a value x where x**2 matches the target

=cut

=head1 CONCURRENCY

=head2 ffork

    block.ffork(*args)

Forks a new process and calls the block with C<args> in the child process, serializing the result to a temporary file. Returns a C<Sidef::Types::Block::Fork> object that can be used to wait for and retrieve the result. The "f" stands for "future fork". Blocks cannot themselves be part of the returned value (attempting to serialize a C<Block> raises an error).

    var compute = {|n|
        (1..n).sum
    }

    var future = compute.ffork(1000000)
    # Do other work...
    say(future.wait)     # Wait for and get result

Aliases: I<start>

=cut

=head2 start

    block.start(*args)

Alias for L</ffork>.

Aliases: I<ffork>

=cut

=head2 fork

    block.fork(*args)

Forks a new process and calls the block with C<args> in the child process (without capturing a return value). Returns a C<Sidef::Types::Block::Fork> object wrapping the child process ID.

    var forked = {
        say("Child process")
        # Do work in child
    }.fork

    say("Parent process, child PID: #{forked.pid}")

=cut

=head2 thread

    block.thread(*args)

Runs the block with C<args> in a new native thread (using the C<threads> or C<forks> module). Returns a thread handle object that can be joined (C<.join>, C<.get>, or C<.wait>) to retrieve the block's result.

    var compute = {|n|
        (1..n).sum
    }

    var t = compute.thread(1000)
    # Do other work...
    say(t.join)     # Wait for thread and get result

Aliases: I<thr>

=cut

=head2 thr

    block.thr(*args)

Alias for L</thread>.

Aliases: I<thread>

=cut

=head1 INTROSPECTION AND CONVERSION

=head2 dump

    block.dump

Returns a string representation of the block (its declaration-style signature together with an internal name and address), the same representation used for automatic stringification.

    var block = {|x| x * 2 }
    say(block.dump)      #=> "{|x| ... }"-style representation

Aliases: I<to_s>, I<to_str>

=cut

=head2 to_s

    block.to_s

Alias for L</dump>.

Aliases: I<dump>, I<to_str>

=cut

=head2 to_str

    block.to_str

Alias for L</dump>.

Aliases: I<dump>, I<to_s>

=cut

=head2 time

    block.time

Runs the block (with no arguments) and returns the wall-clock time it took to execute, in seconds, as a C<Number> with sub-second precision.

    var duration = {
        # Some computation
        1000.times {|i| i**2 }
    }.time

    say("Execution took #{duration} seconds")

=cut

=head2 capture

    block.capture

Runs the block with its standard output redirected to an in-memory buffer, and returns everything the block printed as a C<String> (decoded as UTF-8), instead of letting it go to the console.

    var output = {
        say("Hello, world!")
    }.capture

    say(output)          #=> "Hello, world!\n"

Aliases: I<cap>

=cut

=head2 cap

    block.cap

Alias for L</capture>.

Aliases: I<capture>

=cut

=head2 get_value

    block.get_value

Returns a plain Perl code reference that, when called, invokes the block -- automatically forwarding Perl's topicalizing C<$_> (or C<$a>/C<$b>, when set) as arguments. Used internally to let blocks act as ordinary Perl subs (for example, as comparison functions for Perl-level sorting).

=cut

=head1 EXAMPLES

=head2 Functional Programming

    # Map, filter, and reduce operations
    var numbers = (1..10)

    var evens = numbers.grep{|n| n.is_even }
    var doubled = evens.map{|n| n * 2 }
    var sum = doubled.sum

    say(sum)             #=> 60

=head2 Closures and Scope

    func make_counter {
        var count = 0
        return {
            ++count
        }
    }

    var counter1 = make_counter()
    var counter2 = make_counter()

    say(counter1())      #=> 1
    say(counter1())      #=> 2
    say(counter2())      #=> 1  # Independent counter

=head2 Parallel Processing

    # Process data in parallel using threads
    var data = (1..8)
    var threads = data.map {|n|
        { n**3 }.thread
    }

    var results = threads.map {|t| t.join }
    say(results)         #=> [1, 8, 27, 64, 125, 216, 343, 512]

=head2 Memoization for Performance

    # Recursive Fibonacci with memoization
    var fib = {|n|
        n <= 1 ? n : (fib(n-1) + fib(n-2))
    }.cache

    say(fib(100))        # Computes efficiently

=head1 SEE ALSO

=over 4

=item * L<Sidef::Types::Array::Array>

=item * L<Sidef::Types::Hash::Hash>

=item * L<Sidef::Types::Number::Number>

=back

=cut
